JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
ongoing struggle to craft a
health care reform bill in the
U.S. Senate.
Republican lawmakers
are scrambling to draft
a new version of their
bill before leaving
Washington for the
July fourth recess.
A short time ago, I spoke with
Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri,
who is vice chair of the
Senate Republican Conference.
I begin by asking where
the efforts to find
compromise stand right now.
SEN.
ROY BLUNT (R), Missouri: I think
it's challenging and challenged.
We will see what happens, but
this is a difficult topic that
touches every American family.
And the more members of the
Senate and the House both know
about it, I think the harder
it is to reach that conclusion
you would like to get to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
there are reports, as
you know, news reports
that the majority leader,
Mitch McConnell, is trying to
come up with accommodations
to appeal to both sides of
this argument, to
moderate Republicans.
One of the stories is that
he's considering keeping the
tax on high-income individuals
in order to pay for more of
the gaps in Medicaid coverage.
And, by the way, the
Congressional Budget Office is
saying the cuts to Medicaid are
going to be much deeper than
thought in the future years.
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Well, I think what
they're saying is, in the
second 10 years, you have even
more substantial savings.
Now, remember, there
are no cuts to Medicaid.
Every year in Medicaid, you
spend more money than you spent
the year before under this
plan, but the growth is not
as great as it would be if you
continued to pay, for instance,
100 percent for single
able-bodied adults.
We have got a plan where the
states were told, OK, we will
pay 100 percent for able-bodied
single adults, but we're only
going to pay an average of 52
percent for mothers and their
young children.
Now, there is something
wrong with the way that
system is put together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But
keeping that tax on
higher-income individuals,
is that being looked at?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: I think it is.
I think everything is being
looked at, both on the revenue
side and on the expenditure
side and trying to reach that
point where 50 Republicans,
that might include the vice
president being one of the 50,
is -- are being added to that
50 is what it takes to get this
done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of
the other things we're
seeing, a potential
way of appealing to the
moderates, adding $45 billion or
so for opioid abuse treatment.
Is that something else
that's on the table?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: It's a problem that
Congress has really taken on
in the last couple of years.
I started sharing the
committee that appropriates
money for health and
human services two years
ago.
We tripled that year the
money that was being - -
to be spent on opioids.
Legislation sort
of followed that.
Then we doubled that tripling.
I think, at some point, there's
a limit to how many times we
can multiply that in a short
period of time, but
this is a real problem.
In Missouri, more people
die from drug overdoses
than car accidents.
If you're a first-responder
in Missouri as part of a fire
department, you're three times
more likely to respond to a drug
overdose than you are a fire.
So it's a problem.
I don't know exactly what the
right number is, but certainly
I think members of the Senate
and House are rightly
concerned about it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to appeal
to conservatives, we're reading
that the majority leader is
giving more options for coverage
plans, allowing people, in
other words, to have a choice of
some less costly, cheaper
plans, in effect, that would
provide less coverage, but would
give them more choices.
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Give
them more choices.
It might also provide some
more up-front coverage.
I think one of the lessons we
should have learned from what's
happened with the current
plan is that there is insurance
coverage, but there is not
really, many times, access
to health care.
If you have these high
deductibles, there is every --
there is a disincentive to get
the policy, because you would
have to pay another -- I think
the average of deductible
policies on the individual
market is $6,000 per individual
before the insurance really
kicked in, and if two of
you got sick, $12,000.
Makes it hard to make that
decision, particularly
when you think what
your family needs is the
first $1,000 that covers the
kids getting sick with the
flu or something like that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you
think the chances are now that
you're going to be able to come
up with something that passes?
And I ask this because President
Trump tweeted this morning, he
said, "If Republican senators
are unable to pass what they
are working on now, they should
immediately repeal and then
replace at a later date."
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Well, it's pretty
late to come up with a new plan.
The hypotheticals are never
legislatively what you
want to be talking about.
You want to be talking
about what you're
focused on at the time.
I think it's fair to say that
it's hard to get 50 senators
out of 52 to vote for a package
this complicated.
Actually, Judy, the more that
members know about this, in
many ways, the harder it is
to make that final decision,
because you have got so much
information, and you know how
many other things are impacted
here by one decision here
that, five decisions later,
has made a big difference
in somebody's life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if you
can't get it passed in July,
do you just set it aside?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Well, I think we have
had a three-step plan in mind.
We pass this bill that did as
much as we could to kind of
clear the way for Democrats and
Republicans to work
together later.
The secretary of health and
human services would look at
the 1,400-plus rules that the
law gave that person the
ability to define and see how
those could be better defined,
so they were better for
families, better for
access and then, when
that's done, get down
to the real work of Republicans
and Democrats working together
to do things you can do outside
the budget restraints
of the way we're trying
to do this first step.
And if the first step doesn't
work, then you just go to, I
guess, a two-step process, and
it will take longer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Where
you do finally work with
Democrats, Democrats and
Republicans together?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last thing...
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: And that's
going to happen.
That has to happen to expand
the way more people can get
more insurance in groups, to
look at things like more
transparency from providers.
That eventually has to happen.
But it doesn't have to
happen to stabilize the
moment we're in right now.
The insurance markets,
the individual markets
are collapsing.
A third of the counties
in America now only
have one company that's
willing to offer an
insurance product
on the exchange.
The estimate for next year is
over 40 percent of the counties.
And if you only have would
be choice, you really
don't have any choice.
You either buy that policy or
pay the penalty, and all those
things will happen if we don't
change the current law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last thing I want
to ask you about, Senator Blunt,
and that is the president's
tweets.
A lot of attention has been
diverted in the last few
days to the president's
tweets criticizing
cable news hosts Joe
Scarborough, Mike
Brzezinski, in her case in
very harsh personal terms.
What's your reaction?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Well, there's no
doubt that cable news hosts can
say things that the president
of the United States
shouldn't say, and people
can be harsh at you.
That doesn't mean you
benefit by being harsh back.
I think, generally,
the president's tweets
are not helpful to him.
At the same time, he's figured
out a way to communicate with
people in ways that no other
president has, or he
wouldn't be president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do those
tweets help his agenda
and the Republican agenda?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: They sometimes they
do and they sometimes don't.
I think there needs to be
a much more significant
filter on those tweets.
It's OK to have some unspoken
and untweeted thoughts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Roy
Blunt of Missouri, thank you
very much for joining us.
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Nice to be with you.